Welcome back everyone.
Now that we've created our models for users and blog posts.
Let's start by filling out our templates and views for users.
The first thing you do to tackle on users is to actually create the forms that users are going to use
to both log in and register.
Then we'll also create a form for updating user information.
Let's get started by heading over to our project.
All right here we are at the models up-I file that we just created.
Remember we created a user class as well as a blog post class.
Let's get started by setting up the user component of our website.
So we're going to come to our users directory and remember we already created a forms that PI file underneath
the users directory and Ismaili where we're going to be filling out during this lecture.
After this we can begin set up views and templates for users.
The first thing going to do is start by saying from flask WTS import a flask form.
Remember we use this flask form to create our form classes.
Then after that we're all safe from W.T. forms import and the field we'll be using is a String Field
a password field and a submit field.
Then we're also going to have some validators say from W. T.F. forms the validators import data required
e-mail an equal to so data required we'll make sure that that actual input box in the form is filled
out.
Email make sure it's a legitimate email so it has an at symbol hands and a dot com or the org that sort
of thing and then equal to will be using to confirm the user's password.
Then we also may want to raise validation errors.
So if you want to do that we'll say from W-2 forms import a validation error then we'll say from flask
underscored WITF dot file import file field and file allowed.
So a file field file allowed are going to let us have the user actually up the AP N-G or JPEG file in
order to have their profile picture displayed.
OK so those are form based imports.
We also have some user based imports will add in from flask underscore loggin import current user and
then from puppy company blog thought models in poor user.
OK.
So a bunch of imports here.
These first five lines those are for things related to forms.
These second ones right here eight those are going to be things related to users.
So let's start off with the simplest form that's going to be a lock in a form.
So let me collapse this guy and let's imagine the users already registered now they just want to log
in will create a log and form that can fill out and will inherit from flask form and all they need to
provide when they're logging in is their e-mail their password and then hit submit.
So here will say e-mail is equal to a string field and will have the label be e-mailed and then the
validators we're going to say remember you passed it as a list will say data required.
Open close parentheses.
They actually are required to provide e-mail and will say e-mail.
That means their input must also be a standard e-mail address then all say password.
So they're going to provide a password that will be the password field.
Well it's called the label password and then the validators here is just going to be data required.
So they must provide a password as well.
And remember we're not actually going to save that user's password.
We're just hashing it and then comparing it to the hash version we save.
So the actual streaming text we don't save we only save the hash version and then finally after password
they're gonna be able to submit this.
So we'll say submit field and here we can just say something like.
Log in for that particular button.
OK.
So that's our log in form after that.
Let's go ahead and create our registration form so we'll say registration form flask form and so we're
going to look a little similar We're going to have a couple of other things here like checking the e-mail
and checking the user name provided.
So we'll say e-mail and sex are going to be the exact same thing as above.
So we'll see.
E-mail go ahead and copy that paste that in and then we'll also have a similar thing for username so
we'll say user name is equal to.
And then I'm just going to copy and paste the string field here and I'm going to do a couple of adjustments.
One doesn't need to be an email since it's a user name.
And second I don't want the label to be email.
I want it to be user name.
OK.
So we have the e-mail that they registered with the user name they're registered with and then the password
they're going to register with.
And we're going to say copy password field and then stick that in and we want them to confirm their
password because we don't want the users to actually mess up their password input.
So to create another field here called Pass underscore confirm.
And that's also going to be a password field except here are the labels going to be confirm password
and then the validators is going to be data required.
The next thing I want to do is actually link past confirm to password to make sure these to match and
the way we do that is in the validators for the password we're going to passen equal to and then say
pass underscore confirm.
Notice how I do that as a string here.
So that basically says that your first password here has to be equal to the pass confirm attribute there.
OK so that's the equal to.
Remember we're still past that into the list of validators.
And if you want you can also pass on a message to this display in case they mess that up.
So I can say something like a message is equal to passwords must match.
We'll save that.
OK.
So we have the basic attributes email username password pass confirm.
And then we want to do is check the email and the username and make sure someone already hasn't taken
the e-mail or username because remember right now they're registering.
So add two methods here.
One is going to be called check email.
They'll say self and then they'll take in field and we're going to do is say if user.
So again this user right here that's what we imported from puppie company model or excuse me the puppy
company blog that models so that models that py file the Hazar user model.
That's what I'm importing here.
So I'm saying OK.
That model if I were to queery it and say filter by email equal to field data and then say the first
I'll raise an error or something I say raise a validation error and then I can have a message display
here and say your email has been registered.
Already.
So all this does is when someone is registering and their email if we actually query our users and then
filter it by making sure that email is the field data and we grab the very first one if that happens
to exist meaning it's not returning a nun then that e-mails already been registered and we're going
to do a very similar thing for the username.
So similar in fact they can just copy this and paste it here and a set of check email we're just going
to say check username self-field user query and then instead of email here we're going to say by user
name equal to field data first and then here will say your user name has been registered already.
OK.
So here we're checking for e-mail making sure it's unique across our users as well as a user name making
sure that's unique across our users.
If we don't do that then we'll have difficulties assigning blog posts to a particular email or a particular
user that will cause some possibility of errors there.
All right.
So after that we want to do is add in the ability to update the user form and when they up a user form
will add in the ability for them to actually have their own profile picture.
So let's continue we're going to create one last class here called up the user form and it's going to
take in a flask form and here will say e-mail.
And in fact we're going to copy basically what we had in the registration.
So they'll be able to provide an e-mail and a user name.
So we're going to copy that person in here.
So when they want to update their e-mail or update their user name that's possible for them.
And then we're also going to add in is the ability to update their picture.
So the picture is going to be a default picture.
And if you take a look back at the models that Pif file notice again the profile image is actually just
a default profile image that we're going to supply it later on.
So if we come back the forms up high if we go to the update page we want them to be able to update.
So we're going to say a file field and we'll say up the profile picture and here we're going to have
the validators we're going to put a list in here and we can call file allowed.
And this is where you can actually pasan a list of files here.
So my use of validators itself is a list and then files allowed.
Or excuse me file allowed as a parameter.
The very first thing it takes in is the list itself.
So then we're going to say JP for JPAC and Angie.
So that way they can't upload an excel file or some other type of file.
We're going to say it has to end in a jpeg or a PMG in order for you to upload it.
OK.
So that's going to be this picture is just a file field and then we'll allow them to submit.
So will say submit is equal to a submit field and then we'll say update let's make sure we actually
added a submit for registration.
And I think we did.
So let's put that in as well.
We'll say after they've confirmed their password they can submit.
So say submit is equal to a submit field and Ill just say let's register OK.
Save that.
So they're able to submit and they're able to update.
Now what we want to do is make sure that if they're updating their e-mail and user name that they don't
XLE update it to something that also already exists.
So that means we're going to do the same checks here for check email and check username.
Not only do we do that on registration but we also do that if they want to update their information.
So we just copy and paste those as well.
Save that.
OK.
So that's it for the forms.
What I want to show you now is how we're actually going to be handling images and to do that.
We're going to be creating a picture handler that PI script which is going to use the P L library or
pill library which you can get with Pipp install pillow which should already be in your requirements
a text file but that allows us to actually handle images with Python.
So what I'm going to do is expand this.
Remember we're creating the users that's going to hold everything related to users.
Right now we have in forms and views I'm going to create a new file here and call it picture underscore
händler dot pi.
So again this is the picture underscore handler that PI file and it's underneath users.
So if you go to users forward slash you should be able to find that file we just created.
And this is going to be the file that essentially allows us to upload pictures so that we're going to
import os for the operating system and we'll save from p i l in poor image.
And if you get an error later on when you're trying to run it says Paille not found.
Make sure you actually install it with a pip install the case you haven't already then will save from
flask.
Import your URL for.
And we're also going to import current app something we haven't seen before and we're going to create
a function here that allows a user to actually add a profile pic sorgen say add profile pic and we're
going to have a picture upload that's passed Paston as well as a username that's passed in.
So we're going to grab the file name.
We're going to say filename is equal to.
And that pic upload one of the features is going to have the actual name of the file.
So when you grab a file on your computer it may be like your picture that jpeg.
When you upload it that your picture name is the filename.
So we have the file name there.
And what I want to do is now grab the extension type.
So what I'm going to do is say that the extension type is equal to filename split on the dots and then
grab that last item.
So what does this actually mean.
Well let's imagine this you're going to be uploading something that looks like this my picture.
Da Jay peg.
So this is what saved right now as a file name.
That's just a string.
We're going to end up splitting on that dot and then grabbing that last string which in this case is
just jpeg.
So that way I know if it's a jpeg or TNG which will be important when we want to actually check the
file types later on.
So I have the extension type.
So then the actual storage file name.
I'm going to be using is I'm going to convert the user name to a string just in case it's not already
and then I'm going to concatenate it with a dot and then concatenate it with the extension type that
was provided.
So that means that if someone upload something called My picture that they pay We're going to be saving
it as that person's user name dot Jay peg or dot P and G whatever the extension type happens to be essentially
converting their upload into a unique user name that jpeg or thought PAGG file.
Now if you don't like actually storing people's usernames you think that's kind of a security issue.
You can go ahead and just give them some sort of random hash.
But we want to make sure we don't have any conflicts with our actual jpeg or PNB files.
Otherwise people would have the same profile image.
And now we're almost done once we have the storage file name we're just going to create a file path
to save it to will see a file path is equal to OS path join and then say grab the current applications
root path and then we're going to join it with static forward slash profile underscore pick's and then
Khama the storage file name.
So what that does is it basically says OK grab the root path of your current application.
In my case that would be like puppy company blogger class examples and then look for static profile
pics.
Remember we have a static folder here.
We're going to go ahead and create a new folder here that corresponds to the profile underscore pick's
folder we just created underneath static.
I now have profile pics and then it's going to store the storage file name.
So that's the entire file path.
And then we want to do is make sure everything's the same size.
So I'm going to say output size is equal to I'll say 200 by 200 pixels you can feel free to play around
that size.
And then I'll take the pick.
Say image opened the picture up blue.
So that was the pic upload that the user provide in.
I'll say pick thumbnail.
So thumbnail is just a specialized method that allows you to kind of squeeze it into whatever pixel
size you want.
So in that case I'll squeeze it into this output size and then I will say this.
So say pick save file path and then I'm going to return the storage file name.
All right.
So we're going to be using this entire function later on in our views that we're going to be dealing
with in the very next lecture.
But let's go ahead and go over everything we've done so far.
And let's zoom out so we can kind of get the main idea here.
OK.
So we'll first start off with the forms.
Nothing too complicated here essentially just a bunch of imports and then we created a log in form e-mail
password a registration form to special things going on here the password and past confirm as well as
checking user names and e-mails to make sure they're unique.
And there have been already registered.
And then we have this update user form where we have e-mail user name the ability to up the picture.
We check for which files are allowed and then we also want to check their email and username if they
decide to update those as well.
Now in order to make the pictures and have that work in conjunction with both of the user form and the
views that we're going to be creating later we have to create this picture handler function right here
and we haven't used this yet.
We haven't used ad profile pic.
We're going to be using it when we actually create the views for the user.
All this does is basically take that picture upload from the user as well as that current user name
and then assigns that new file a file name sets it to a thumbnail size and then saves it and returns
back the actual storage file name.
OK.
So that's it for this lecture.
Coming up next we're going to continue our building out of users by building out the views for them.
We'll see you at the next lecture.